VEML7700 and VEML6030 light sensors (#3525)
OttoWinter/esphomedocs: components/sensor/veml7700.rst

    lux & - & \text{calculated illumination, lx}\\
    lux_{comp} & - & \text{compensated illumniation, lx}\\
    \end{array}

Available data
--------------

The implementation offers seven sensors:
- Two providing *lux* value,
- Two unitless data measurements directly from the device,
- Two actual *gain* and *integration time* values used for the measurement (useful in automatic mode), and
- One fully artificial, somewhat representing near-infrared part of spectrum.

- **ambient_light**: Illuminance value for *ALS* channel representing human eye, lx
- **full_spectrum**: Illuminance value for *WHITE* channel with wide spectrum, lx
- **infrared**: Calculated illuminance value (*WHITE* minus *ALS*) representing near-infrared spectre, lx
- **ambient_light_counts**: Raw 16 bit reading from *ALS* channel, counts
- **full_spectrum_counts**: Raw 16 bit reading from *WHITE* channel, counts
- **actual_gain**: The actual gain value being used for values reported, multiplier
- **actual_integration_time**: The actual integration time being used for values reported, ms

Example configuration
---------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry

>     i2c:
>       # ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

VEML7700 and VEML6030 Ambient Light Sensors
===========================================

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for setting up VEML7700 / VEML6030 ambient light sensors in ESPHome.
    :image: veml7700.jpg
    :keywords: VEML7700, VEML6300

The ``veml7700`` sensor platform allows you to use the Vishay VEML7700 and VEML6030 ambient light sensors with ESPHome.
Communication with the device is over :ref:`I²C <i2c>`, which must be present in your configuration. VEML7700 and VEML6030 

> are basically the same but in different packagings. Bigger VEML7700 has fixed address of ``0x10``, address of tiny VEML6030 
> can be selected - either ``0x10`` or ``0x48``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are basically the same but in different packages. The VEML7700 uses a fixed address of ``0x10``, while the smaller VEML6030 
can be configured to use either ``0x10`` or ``0x48``.
```

The VEML 7700/6030 devices are available on breakout boards from a number of vendors including `Adafruit`_, `SparkFun`_, 
`DFRobot`_, and others.

.. _Adafruit: http://www.adafruit.com/products/4162
.. _SparkFun: https://www.sparkfun.com/products/15436
.. _DFRobot: https://www.dfrobot.com/product-1620.html

.. figure:: images/veml7700-full.jpg
    :align: center 
    :width: 70.0%

    VEML7700 Ambient Light Sensor on a board and standalone sensors.

.. figure:: images/veml7700-ui.png
    :align: center
    :width: 60.0%

    VEML sensors in Home Assistant UI.

The sensor is a high accuracy ambient light digital 16-bit resolution sensor with dynamic range from 0 lux to about 120,000 lux.

> Wide range of measurements enabled by four configurable *gain* levels and six different *integration time* options.
> Higher values used for lower light conditions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its wide range of measurements is enabled by four configurable *gain* levels and six different *integration time* options.
Higher gain values are typically used for lower light conditions. 
```

> The sensor has two photodiodes with different spectral response represented by two channels: *ALS* channel and *WHITE* channel.
> *ALS*, or *Ambient light* channel follows so-called human eye curve very well. *WHITE* channel offers a much higher responsivity 
> for a much wider wavelength spectrum, capturing quite a lot of near-infrared radiance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sensor has two photodiodes with different spectral response represented by two channels: an *ALS* channel and a *WHITE* channel.
The *ALS*, or *Ambient light* channel follows a so-called human eye curve very closely. The *WHITE* channel covers a much wider wavelength/spectrum, capturing quite a lot of near-infrared radiance.
```

.. figure:: images/veml7700-spectral.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100.0%

    ALS and WHITE channels spectral response

> Using Automatic measurement mode is advised: proper *gain* and *integration time* are selected by the component by doing several 
> measurements, as per recommendations by manufacturer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this component's automatic measurement mode is advised; in this mode, proper *gain* and *integration time* are automatically selected by the component after
taking several  measurements. To do so, it follows a process recommended by the manufacturer.
```

Should you desire to manually control those parameters - please note that:

- Gain levels of 1/8 and 1/4 shall be used in most cases. 
- Gain levels of 1 an 2 are only intended to be used in low light conditions < 100 lux. For very high illuminations it shows high non-linearity.
- In the range of 0 lux - 1000 lux the sensor measurements are stricly linear for Gain 1/4 and 1/8, after 1000 lux it shows non-linearity. 

> Lux compensation formula is used to get better readings in bright conditions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lux compensation formula is used to get better readings in bright conditions. 
```

However, it gives quite high error in very bright direct sunlight (instead of 100-120 kilolux it might give 150-200k+).

This Wikipedia `article <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lux>`__ has a table of some lux values for comparison.

Automatic measurement mode
--------------------------

In automatic measurement mode the component starts from Gain 1/8 and 100 ms. 

- If illuminance is higher than 46 lx (100 counts) it gradually reduces integration time to get good reading (best in range 100 - 10,000 counts). 
- In case of low illuminance (less than 46 lx) it tries to gradually increase gain and only then increase integration time.

Please note, that in low light conditions measurement process might take several seconds due to long exposure periods and sensor reconfigurations.

Lux compensation
----------------

> Lux compensation is done as per recommendation from the manufacturer, however it can be turned off setting ``lux_compensation: false``
> in configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lux compensation is done as recommended by the manufacturer, however it can be turned off by
setting ``lux_compensation: false`` in your device's configuration.
```

.. math::

    \displaystyle \begin{array}{l}
    lux & = & counts \times resolution(time, gain)\\
    lux_{comp} & =& 6.0135e \times 10^{-13} \times lux^4 - 9.3924e \times 10^{-9}  \times  lux^3\\
    & & + 8.1488e \times 10^{-5}  \times  lux^2 + 1.0023  \times  lux\\
    \\
    \text{Where:} & & \\
    counts & - & \text{sensor readings, counts}\\
    resolution & - & \text{sensor resolution for given integration time and gain, lx/counts}\\
    lux & - & \text{calculated illumination, lx}\\
    lux_{comp} & - & \text{compensated illumniation, lx}\\
    \end{array}

Available data
--------------

> The implementation offers seven sensors: two providing *lux* value, two - unitless data measurements directly from the device 
> and two - actual *gain* and *integration time* values used for the measurement (useful in automatic mode), and one - fully 
> artificial, somewhat representing near-infrared part of spectre.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation offers seven sensors:
- Two providing *lux* value,
- Two unitless data measurements directly from the device,
- Two actual *gain* and *integration time* values used for the measurement (useful in automatic mode), and
- One fully artificial, somewhat representing near-infrared part of spectrum.
```

- **ambient_light**: Illuminance value for *ALS* channel representing human eye, lx
- **full_spectrum**: Illuminance value for *WHITE* channel with wide spectrum, lx
- **infrared**: Calculated illuminance value (*WHITE* minus *ALS*) representing near-infrared spectre, lx
- **ambient_light_counts**: Raw 16 bit reading from *ALS* channel, counts
- **full_spectrum_counts**: Raw 16 bit reading from *WHITE* channel, counts
- **actual_gain**: The actual gain value being used for values reported, multiplier
- **actual_integration_time**: The actual integration time being used for values reported, ms

Example configuration
---------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    i2c:
      # ...
    sensor:
      - platform: veml7700
        address: 0x10
        update_interval: 60s
        ambient_light:
          name: "Ambient light"
        full_spectrum:
          name: "Full spectrum"
        infrared:
          name: "Calculated near-IR"

Configuration variables:
------------------------

> - **id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
> - **address** (*Optional*, int): Manually specify the I²C address of the device.
>   Defaults to ``0x10``. VEML7700 only uses address ``0x10``. VEML6030 can be either
>   ``0x48`` or ``0x10`` (hardware configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is explained on the I2C & Sensor pages referenced below (and you already mentioned the addresses used earlier).
